===== PDF PAGE 610 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     565
Figure 24–1  Representation of entire objects is central to 
high-level visual processing. Representation of entire objects 
involves integration of visual features extracted at earlier stages 
in the visual pathways. This integration is a generalization of the 
numerous retinal images generated by the same object and of 
different members of an object category. The representation also 
incorporates information from other sensory modalities, attaches 
emotional valence, and associates the object with the memory of 
other objects or events. Object representations can be stored in 
working memory and recalled in association with other memories.
ASSOCIATIVE LINKING:
Association between 
different objects/
events
Detection
of visual
primitives,
surfaces
Recall
Working
memory
IMAGE LINKING: 
Generalization across 
different images of an object
Signals from other 
sensory modalities
Emotional
valence
Integration of 
visual primitives
CATEGORICAL  LINKING:
Generalization across
different members
of an object category
SEMANTIC CONTENT
Object
representation
Low-level visual 
processing
Intermediate-level
visual processing
High-level visual processing
Detection
of image
contrast
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is the Primary 
Center for Object Recognition
Primate studies implicate neocortical regions of the 
temporal lobe, principally the inferior temporal cortex, 
in object perception. Because the hierarchy of synaptic 
relays in the cortical visual system extends from the 
primary visual cortex to the temporal lobe, the tempo­
ral lobe is a site of convergence of many types of visual 
information.
Neuropsychological studies have found that dam­
age to the inferior temporal cortex can produce spe­
cific failures of object recognition. Neurophysiological 
and functional imaging studies have, in turn, yielded 
remarkable insights into the ways in which the activity 
of inferior temporal neurons represents objects, how 
these representations relate to perceptual and cogni­
tive events, and how they are modified by experience.
Visual signals originating in the retina are pro­
cessed in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus 
before reaching the primary visual cortex (V1). Ascend­
ing visual pathways from V1 follow two main paral­
lel and hierarchically organized streams: the ventral 
and dorsal streams (Chapter 21). The ventral stream 
extends ventrally and anteriorly from V1 through V2, 
via V4, into inferior temporal cortex, which, in macaque 
monkeys, comprises the lower bank of the superior 
temporal sulcus and the ventrolateral convexity of the 
temporal lobe (Figure 24–2). Neurons at each synaptic 
relay in this ventral stream receive convergent input 
from the preceding stage. At the top of the hierarchy, 
inferior temporal neurons are in a position to integrate 
a large and diverse quantity of visual information over 
a vast region of visual space.
The inferior temporal cortex is a large brain region. 
The patterns of anatomical connections to and from 
this region indicate that it comprises at least two main 
functional subdivisions—the posterior area temporo-
occipital cortex and the anterior area temporal cortex—
and functional evidence suggests further subdivisions 

===== PDF PAGE 611 =====
566    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–2  Cortical pathway for object recognition.
A. A lateral view of the macaque brain shows the major pathways 
involved in visual processing, including the pathway for object rec­
ognition (red). (Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal cortex; FEF, 
frontal eye fields; IT, inferior temporal cortex; LIP, lateral intrapari­
etal cortex; MIP, medial intraparietal cortex; MST, medial superior 
temporal cortex; MT, middle temporal cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; 
PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; TEO, 
temporo-occipital cortex; VIP, ventral intraparietal cortex.)
B. Lateral and ventral views of the macaque monkey brain 
show the cortical areas involved in object recognition. 
(Abbreviations: IT, inferior temporal cortex; PF, prefrontal 
cortex; STP, superior temporal polysensory area; TEO, 
temporo-occipital cortex.)
C. The inferior temporal cortex (IT) is the end stage of the 
ventral stream (red arrows) and is reciprocally connected 
with neighboring areas of the medial temporal lobe and pre­
frontal cortex (gray arrows). This chart illustrates the main 
connections and predominant direction of information flow. 
(Abbreviations: ER, entorhinal cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; PH, 
parahippocampal cortex; PR, perirhinal cortex; STP, superior 
temporal polysensory area; TEO, temporo-occipital cortex.)
IT
V3
V1
V4
V2
FEF
PMv
PMd
TEO
MT/
MST
AIP
VIP
MIP
LIP
PF
A
Ventral pathway
(object recognition) 
TEO
V4
V1
STP
IT
PF
V2
Perirhinal
cortex
Parahippocampal
cortex
Hippocampus
(deep)
B
Entorhinal 
cortex
STP
ER
Hippocampus
PF
PH
PR
IT
TEO
V4
V2
V1
C
into multiple functionally specialized areas. As we shall 
see, the distinction between anterior and posterior parts 
of the inferior temporal cortex is supported by both neu­
ropsychological and neurophysiological evidence.
Clinical Evidence Identifies the Inferior Temporal 
Cortex as Essential for Object Recognition
The first clear insight into the neural pathways medi­
ating object recognition was obtained in the late 19th 
century when the American neurologist Sanger Brown 
and the British physiologist Edward Albert Schäfer 
found that experimental lesions of the temporal lobe 
in primates abolished the ability to recognize objects. 
Unlike the deficits that accompany lesions of occipital 
cortical areas, temporal lobe lesions do not impair sen­
sitivity to basic visual attributes, such as color, motion, 
and distance. Because of the unusual type of visual 
loss, the impairment was originally called psychic 
blindness, but this term was later replaced by visual 
agnosia (“without visual knowledge”), a term coined 
by Sigmund Freud.

===== PDF PAGE 612 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     567
Figure 24–3  Neurons in the temporal lobe of humans are 
involved in object recognition. Damage to the inferior tempo­
ral cortex impairs the ability to recognize visual objects, a condi­
tion known as visual agnosia. There are two major categories 
of visual agnosia: Apperceptive agnosia results from damage to 
the posterior region, and associative agnosia results from dam­
age of the anterior region. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Farah 1990. © 1990 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)
In humans, there are two basic categories of visual 
agnosia, apperceptive and associative, the description 
of which led to a two-stage model of object recogni­
tion in the visual system. With apperceptive agnosia, 
the ability to match or copy complex visual shapes 
or objects is impaired (Figure 24–3). This impairment 
results from disruption of the first stage of object recog­
nition: integration of visual features into sensory rep­
resentations of entire objects. With associative agnosia, 
the ability to match or copy complex objects remains 
intact, but the ability to identify objects is impaired. 
This impairment results from disruption of the second 
stage of object recognition: association of the sensory 
representation of an object with knowledge of the 
object’s meaning or function.
Consistent with this functional hierarchy, apper­
ceptive agnosia is most common following damage to 
the posterior inferior temporal cortex, whereas asso­
ciative agnosia, a higher-order perceptual deficit, is 
more common following damage to the anterior infe­
rior temporal cortex. Neurons in the anterior subdivi­
sion exhibit a variety of memory-related properties not 
seen in the posterior area.
More focal lesions within temporal cortex can 
lead to specific deficits. Damage to a small region of 
the human temporal lobe results in an inability to 
Associative agnosia
Apperceptive agnosia
Model
Model
Patient’s drawing
Patient’s drawing
Verbal 
identiﬁcation
of object
Verbal 
identiﬁcation
of object
“Circle”
“Square”
“Diamond”
“Three”
“Four”
Ability to copy 
or match 
visual stimuli
Deﬁciency of 
object perception
Clinical 
interpretation
Cannot interpret, understand, 
or assign meaning to objects
Cannot see object parts 
as a uniﬁed whole
Sensory representation is created 
normally but cannot be associated 
with meaning, function, or utility
Unable to construct sensory
representations of visual stimuli

===== PDF PAGE 613 =====
568    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–4  Neurons in the inferior temporal cortex of the 
monkey are involved in face recognition. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Desimone et al. 1984. Copyright © 1984 Society 
for Neuroscience.)
A. The location of the inferior temporal cortex of the monkey is 
shown in a lateral view and coronal section. The colored area is 
the location of the recorded neurons.
B. Peristimulus time histograms illustrate the frequency of 
action potentials in a single neuron in response to different 
images (shown below the histograms). This neuron responded 
selectively to faces. Masking of critical features, such as the 
mouth or eyes (4, 5), led to a substantial but not complete 
reduction in response. Scrambling the parts of the face (2) 
nearly eliminated the response.
recognize faces, a form of associative agnosia known 
as prosopagnosia. Patients with prosopagnosia can iden­
tify a face as a face, recognize its parts, and even detect 
specific emotions expressed by the face, but they are 
unable to identify a particular face as belonging to a 
specific person.
Prosopagnosia is an example of a category-specific 
agnosia, in which patients with temporal lobe damage 
fail to recognize particular items belonging to a spe­
cific semantic category. Category-specific agnosias for 
living things, fruits, vegetables, tools, or animals have 
also been reported. Owing to the pronounced behav­
ioral significance of faces and the normal ability of 
people to recognize an extraordinarily large number 
of faces, prosopagnosia may simply be the most com­
monly diagnosed variety of category-specific agnosia.
Neurons in the Inferior Temporal Cortex Encode 
Complex Visual Stimuli and Are Organized in 
Functionally Specialized Columns
The coding of visual information in the temporal lobe 
has been studied extensively using electrophysiological 
Inferior
temporal
cortex
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
No color
6
A
B
2.5°
techniques, beginning with the work of Charles Gross 
and colleagues in the 1970s. Neurons in this region 
have distinctive response properties. They are rela­
tively insensitive to simple stimulus features such as 
orientation and color. Instead, the vast majority pos­
sess large, centrally located receptive fields and encode 
complex stimulus features. These selectivities often 
appear somewhat arbitrary. An individual neuron 
might, for example, respond strongly to a crescent-
shaped pattern of a particular color and texture. Cells 
with such unique selectivities likely provide inputs to 
higher-order neurons that respond to specific mean­
ingful objects.
In fact, within the inferior temporal cortex, sev­
eral small subpopulations of neurons are activated by 
highly meaningful objects, such as faces and hands 
(Figure 24–4), as Charles Gross discovered. For cells 
that respond to the sight of a hand, individual fingers 
are particularly critical. Among cells that respond to 
faces, the most effective stimulus for some cells is a 
frontal view of the face, whereas for others it is a side 
view. Although some neurons respond preferentially 
to faces in general, others respond only to specific 

===== PDF PAGE 614 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     569
Figure 24–5  Neurons in the anterior portion of the inferior 
temporal cortex that respond to complex visual stimuli are 
organized into columns. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Tanaka 2003. Copyright © 2003 Oxford University Press.)
A. Optical images of the surface of the anterior inferior tempo­
ral cortex illustrate regions selectively activated by the objects 
shown at the right.
B. Neurons of the inferior temporal cortex are organized in func­
tionally specialized columns that extend from the surface of the 
cortex. According to this model, each column includes neurons 
that respond to a specific visually complex object. Columns of 
neurons that represent variations of an object, such as different 
faces or different fire extinguishers, constitute a hypercolumn.
facial expressions. It seems likely that such cells con­
tribute directly to face recognition.
In initial relays in the cortical visual system, neu­
rons that respond to the same stimulus features, such 
as orientation or direction of motion, but from differ­
ent parts of the visual field are organized in columns. 
Cells within the inferior temporal cortex are simi­
larly organized. Columns of neurons representing the 
same or similar stimulus properties commonly extend 
throughout the cortical thickness and over a range 
of approximately 400 μm. The columns are arranged 
such that different stimuli that possess some similar 
features are represented in partially overlapping col­
umns (Figure 24–5). Thus, one stimulus can activate 
multiple columns. Horizontal connections can span 
many millimeters and may facilitate the formation of 
distributed networks for encoding objects.
The Primate Brain Contains Dedicated Systems for 
Face Processing
Prosopagnosia often occurs in the absence of any other 
form of agnosia. Such a highly specific perceptual defi­
cit could be explained by focal lesions of face-selective 
neurons located in exclusive clusters. This idea was 
strengthened by the discovery of face-selective regions 
in the human brain by Nancy Kanwisher and col­
leagues using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) and by Gregory McCarthy and colleagues using 
direct electrophysiological recordings from the surface 
of the human brain. Kanwisher and colleagues found 
that during the presentation of pictures of faces and 
other objects one area in the human temporal lobe, the 
fusiform face area, responded significantly more dur­
ing the presentation of faces compared to other objects.
Subsequently, several more face-selective areas 
were found, primarily in temporal but also in pre­
frontal cortex. Early studies of these areas provided 
circumstantial evidence for clustering of face-selective 
neurons. In later studies, Doris Tsao, Winrich Freiwald, 
and colleagues directly demonstrated such clustering 
and showed that face processing might be performed 
by a dedicated face-processing network spanning from 
the posterior part of inferior temporal cortex to prefron­
tal cortex. Using fMRI, they found six areas in tempo­
ral cortex and three in prefrontal cortex of the macaque 
monkey that responded more selectively to faces than 
to other objects. These areas, called face patches, are 
found at highly consistent locations across individuals 
and thus are named based on their location. Each face 
patch is a few millimeters in diameter and thus differs 
organizationally from the inferior temporal col­
umns. Intracellular recordings from the face patches 
1 mm
10 deg
A
B

===== PDF PAGE 615 =====
570    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–6  The temporal lobe contains a network of 
face-selective areas.
A. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of macaque mon­
keys watching pictures of faces and other objects identified six 
face-selective areas in the temporal lobe, inside and around 
the superior temporal sulcus. These areas occur at the same 
locations across subjects and have been given names based on 
their anatomical location (PL, posterior lateral; ML, medial lat­
eral; MF, medial fundus of the superior temporal sulcus; 
AL, anterior lateral; AF, anterior fundus; AM, anterior medial). These 
areas are interconnected to form a face-processing network.
B. Single-neuron recordings from areas ML, AL, and AM show 
tuning to head orientation. ML cells are tuned to specific head 
orientations, many AL cells are tuned to multiple orientations 
that are mirror-symmetric versions of each other, and AM cells 
are broadly and more weakly tuned to head orientation. These 
three representations in interconnected areas can be thought 
of as transformations of each other (arrows).
revealed that the vast majority of cells respond selec­
tively more to faces than to other objects. Thus, mil­
lions of face cells are clustered into a fixed number of 
small areas. These areas are directly connected to each 
other, thus forming a face-processing network. Within 
this network, each node appears to be functionally spe­
cialized. From posterior to anterior locations within 
the temporal lobe, the initial face patches respond 
to particular views of the face, and then face patches 
become gradually more selective to identity and less 
selective for angle of view. Furthermore, dorsal face 
areas within the temporal lobe exhibit a selectivity for 
natural facial motion, which ventral areas lack. Thus, 
a highly specialized network, located primarily in 
temporal cortex, processes the multiple dimensions of 
information conveyed by a face (Figure 24–6).
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is Part of a Network 
of Cortical Areas Involved in Object Recognition
Object recognition is intimately intertwined with vis­
ual categorization, visual memory, and emotion, and 
AM
AL
ML
ML
AL
AM
PL
MF
AF
A
B
the outputs of the inferior temporal cortex contribute 
to these functions (see Figure 24–2). Among the princi­
pal projections are those to the perirhinal and parahip­
pocampal cortices, which lie medially adjacent to the 
ventral surface of the inferior temporal cortex (Figure 
24–2C). These regions project, in turn, to the entorhinal 
cortex and the hippocampal formation, both of which 
are involved in long-term memory storage and retrieval. 
A second major projection from the inferior temporal 
cortex is to the prefrontal cortex, an important site for 
high-level visual processing. As we shall see, prefrontal 
neurons play important roles in object categorization, 
visual working memory, and memory recall.
The inferior temporal cortex also provides input—
directly and indirectly via the perirhinal cortex—to the 
amygdala, which is believed to apply emotional valence 
to sensory stimuli and to engage the cognitive and vis­
ceral components of emotion (Chapter 42). Finally, the 
inferior temporal cortex is a major source of input to 
multimodal sensory areas of cortex such as the superior 
temporal polysensory area (Figure 24–2B), which lies 
dorsally adjacent to the inferior temporal cortex.

===== PDF PAGE 616 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     571
Object Recognition Relies on 
Perceptual Constancy
The ability to recognize objects as the same under 
different viewing conditions, despite the sometimes 
markedly different retinal images, is one of the most 
functionally important requirements of visual experi­
ence. The invariant attributes of an object—for exam­
ple, spatial and chromatic relationships between 
image features or characteristic features such as the 
stripes of a zebra—are cues to the identity and mean­
ing of the objects.
For object recognition to take place, these invari­
ant attributes must be represented independently of 
other image properties. The visual system does this 
with proficiency, and its behavioral manifestation is 
termed perceptual constancy. Perceptual constancy has 
many forms ranging from invariance across simple 
transformations of an object, such as changes of size 
or position, to more difficult ones, such as rotation in 
depth or changes in lighting, and even to the sameness 
of objects within a category: All zebras look alike.
One of the best examples is size constancy. An 
object placed at different distances from an observer 
is perceived as having the same size, even though the 
object produces images of different absolute size on 
the retina. Size constancy has been recognized for cen­
turies, but only in the past several decades has it been 
possible to identify the neural mechanisms responsible. 
An early study found that lesions of the inferior tem­
poral cortex lead to failures of size constancy in mon­
keys, suggesting that neurons in this area play a critical 
role in size constancy. Indeed, one of the most striking 
properties of individual inferior temporal neurons is 
the invariance of their shape selectivity even to very 
big changes in stimulus size (Figure 24–7A).
Another type of perceptual constancy is position 
constancy, in which objects are recognized as the same 
regardless of their location in the visual field. The pat­
tern of selective response of many inferior temporal 
neurons does not vary when an object changes posi­
tion within their large receptive fields (Figure 24–7B). 
Form-cue invariance refers to the constancy of a form 
when the cues that define the form change. The sil­
houette of Abraham Lincoln’s head, for example, is 
readily recognizable whether it is black on white, 
white on black, or red on green. The responses of 
many inferior temporal neurons do not change with 
changes in contrast polarity (Figure 24–7C), color, or 
texture.
Viewpoint invariance refers to the perceptual con­
stancy of three-dimensional objects observed from 
different angles. Because most objects we see are 
three-dimensional and opaque, when looked at from 
different viewpoints, some parts become invisible, 
while others are revealed, and all others change in 
appearance. Yet despite the limitless range of reti­
nal images that might be cast by a familiar object, an 
observer can readily recognize an object independently 
of the angle at which it is viewed. There are notable 
exceptions to this rule, which generally occur when an 
object is viewed from an angle that yields an unchar­
acteristic retinal image, such as a bucket viewed from 
directly above.
Thus, object recognition mechanisms must infer 
the identity of objects from apparent complex shapes. 
Many neurons in inferior temporal cortex do not 
exhibit viewpoint invariance. In fact, many are system­
atically tuned to viewing angle. Yet at more anterior 
locations, neurons are not only more size and posi­
tion invariant, but they also exhibit greater invariance 
to viewpoint. The face-processing system is a case in 
point. Neurons in posterior face patches are tuned to 
viewing angle, while neurons in anterior face patches 
exhibit great robustness to changes in viewpoint. Thus, 
population responses in posterior face areas contain 
more information about head orientation than those in 
anterior areas, while the anterior face patches provide 
more information about face identity across head ori­
entations compared to posterior face areas. The degree 
of viewpoint invariance achieved in anterior inferior 
temporal cortex, by individual neurons and popula­
tions of neurons, might be sufficient to account for 
perceptual viewpoint invariance. But this has not been 
directly shown yet. Alternatively, viewpoint invari­
ance may be achieved at a higher stage of cortical pro­
cessing, such as the prefrontal cortex.
Studies of the conditions under which viewpoint 
invariance fails may lead to insights into the neu­
ral mechanisms of the behavior. One such condition 
is presentation of mirror images. Although mirror 
images are not identical, they are frequently perceived 
as such, a confusion reflecting a false-positive identi­
fication by the system for viewpoint invariance. Carl 
Olson and colleagues examined the responses of neu­
rons in a particular region of the inferior temporal cor­
tex to stimuli that were mirror images. Consistent with 
the perceptual confusion, many inferior temporal neu­
rons responded similarly to both images. Similarly, in 
one face area between the posterior and anterior ones 
described earlier, profile-selective cells respond simi­
larly to the left and right profile of a face. These results 
reinforce the conclusion that activity in the inferior 
temporal cortex reflects perceptual invariance, albeit 
incorrectly in this case, rather than the actual features 
of a stimulus.

===== PDF PAGE 617 =====
572    Part IV / Perception
Light
Dark
Frequency
50 deg2
28 deg2
13 deg2
1
1
1
3
2
5
1
4
2
3
4
5
5
5
2, 3, 4
Light
Dark
A  Size constancy
B  Position constancy
C  Form-cue invariance
Neural response (spikes/s)
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
 400
 300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Figure 24–7  Perceptual constancy is reflected in the 
behavior of neurons in the inferior temporal cortex.  The 
responses of many inferior temporal neurons are selective for 
stimuli with a particular frequency (number) of lobes but invari­
ant to object size, position, and reflectance. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Schwartz et al. 1983.)
A. Size constancy. An object is perceived to be the same even 
when the retinal image size decreases with the distance of the 
object in the visual field. The response of the vast majority of infe­
rior temporal neurons to substantial changes in retinal image size 
is invariant, as illustrated here by the record of a single cell.
B. Position constancy. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in position in the retinal image. Almost all infe­
rior temporal neurons respond similarly to the same stimulus in 
different positions in the visual field, as illustrated here by the 
record of a single neuron.
C. Form-cue invariance. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in reflectance. Most inferior temporal neurons 
respond similarly to the two images illustrated, as shown in the 
record of an individual neuron.
Categorical Perception of Objects 
Simplifies Behavior
All forms of perceptual constancy are the product of 
the visual system’s attempts to generalize across dif­
ferent retinal images generated by a single object. A 
still more general type of constancy is the perception 
of individual objects as belonging to the same semantic 
category. The apples in a basket or the many appear­
ances of the letter A in different fonts, for example, are 
physically distinct but are effortlessly perceived as 
categorically identical.
Categorical perception is classically defined as the 
ability to distinguish objects of different categories better 
than objects of the same category. For example, it is more 
difficult to discriminate between two red lights that differ 
in wavelength by 10 nm than to discriminate between red 
and orange lights with the same wavelength difference.
Categorical perception simplifies behavior. For 
example, it usually does not matter whether an apple 

===== PDF PAGE 618 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     573
is completely spherical or slightly mottled on the left 
side or whether the seat we are offered is a Windsor 
or a Chippendale side chair. Similarly, reading ability 
requires that one be able to recognize the alphabet in 
a broad variety of type styles. Like the simpler forms 
of perceptual constancy, categorical perception relies 
on the brain’s ability to extract invariant features of 
objects seen.
Is there a population of neurons that respond uni­
formly to objects within a category and differentially 
to objects of different categories? To test this, David 
Freedman and Earl Miller and colleagues created a 
set of images in which features of dogs and cats were 
merged; the proportions of dog and cat in the compos­
ite images varied continuously from one extreme to the 
other. Monkeys were trained to identify these stimuli 
reliably as either dog or cat. Miller and colleagues then 
recorded from visually responsive neurons in the dor­
solateral prefrontal cortex, a region that receives direct 
input from the inferior temporal cortex. Not only did 
these neurons exhibit the predicted category-selective 
responses—responding well to cat but not dog, or vice 
versa—but the neuronal category boundary also corre­
sponded to the behaviorally learned boundary (Figure 
24–8). By contrast, neurons in inferior temporal cortex 
represented similarity of features, not categories.
The fact that category-specific agnosias some­
times follow damage to the temporal lobe suggests 
there are neurons in the inferior temporal cortex that 
are category-selective similar to those of neurons in 
the prefrontal cortex. Face-selective cells in the tempo­
ral cortex appear to meet this criterion, because their 
responses to a range of faces are often similar. Yet, 
these may constitute a special case, whereas for most 
stimulus conditions, category-selective responses may 
be characteristic of neurons in the prefrontal cortex, 
where visual responses are more commonly linked to 
the behavioral significance of the stimuli.
Visual Memory Is a Component of High-Level 
Visual Processing
Visual experience can be stored as memory, and visual 
memory influences the processing of incoming visual 
information. Object recognition in particular relies on 
the observer’s previous experiences with objects. Thus, 
the contributions of the inferior temporal cortex to 
object recognition must be modifiable by experience.
Studies of the role of experience in visual percep­
tion have focused on two distinct types of experience-
dependent plasticity. One stems from repeated 
exposure or practice, which leads to improvements 
in visual discrimination and object recognition abil­
ity. These experience-dependent changes constitute a 
form of implicit learning known as perceptual learn­
ing (Chapter 23). The other occurs in connection with 
the storage of explicit learning, the learning of facts or 
events that can be recalled consciously (Chapter 54).
Implicit Visual Learning Leads to Changes in the 
Selectivity of Neuronal Responses
The ability to discriminate complex visual stimuli is 
highly modifiable by experience. For example, indi­
viduals who attend to fine differences between auto­
mobile models improve their ability to recognize such 
differences.
In the inferior temporal cortex, neuronal selectivity 
for complex objects can undergo change that parallels 
change in the ability to distinguish objects. For exam­
ple, in a study by Logothetis and colleagues, monkeys 
were trained to identify novel three-dimensional 
objects, such as randomly bent wire forms, from two-
dimensional views of the objects. Extensive training 
led to pronounced improvements in the ability to 
recognize the objects from two-dimensional views. 
After training, a population of neurons was found that 
exhibited marked selectivity for the views seen earlier 
but not for other two-dimensional views of the same 
objects (Figure 24–9).
Other studies with monkeys have shown that 
familiarization with novel faces alters the tuning of 
face-selective neurons in the inferior temporal cortex. 
Similarly, when an animal has experience with novel 
objects formed from simple features, inferior temporal 
neurons become selective for those objects. Such neu­
ronal changes have been found as a consequence of 
the animal engaging in active discrimination or simply 
passive viewing of visual stimuli, and they are often 
manifested as a sharpening of neural selectivity rather 
than changes in absolute firing rate. Sharpening is pre­
cisely the sort of neuronal change that could underlie 
improvements in perceptual discrimination of visual 
stimuli.
The Visual System Interacts With Working Memory 
and Long-Term Memory Systems
Object recognition and learning are intricately linked. 
In fact, learning can generate entire areas of functional 
specialization within inferior temporal cortex. For exam­
ple, monkeys who learn at a young age to associate 
specific shapes (eg, a number symbol) with particular 
reward magnitudes develop specialized brain areas 
that process these specific shapes. These brain regions 

===== PDF PAGE 619 =====
574    Part IV / Perception
13
10
7
4
–500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1
100% Cat
80% Cat
60% Cat
60% Dog
80% Dog
100% Dog
A
B
Time from sample stimulus onset (ms)
Interclass correlations
Choice
Sample
Fixation
Delay
Lateral
prefrontal
cortex
Figure 24–8  Neural coding for categorical perception. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Freedman et al. 2002.)
A. The images combine cat and dog features in varying propor­
tions. Monkeys were trained to categorize an image as cat or 
dog if it had 50% or more features of that animal.
B. Peristimulus time histograms illustrate the responses of 
a prefrontal cortex neuron to the images shown in part A. 
The neuron responded much more weakly to images of cats 
(100%, 80%, and 60%) than to images of dogs (60%, 80%, 
and 100%). Responses to images from the same category 
were very similar despite variations in retinal images that were 
as large as or even larger than the differences in retinal images 
between categories. Thus, the cell was category-specific. Such 
category-specific responses were common among visual neu­
rons of the lateral prefrontal cortex.
develop close to the temporal lobe face patches dis­
cussed earlier.
Two issues concerning interaction between vision 
and memory have been investigated. First, how is 
visual information maintained in short-term working 
memory? Working memory has a limited capacity, act­
ing like a buffer in a computer operating system, and 
consolidation into long-term memory is susceptible to 
interference (Chapter 54). Second, how are long-term 
visual memories and the associations between them 
stored and recalled?
In a visual delayed-response task requiring access 
to stimulus information beyond the duration of the 
stimulus (Box 24–1), many vision-related neurons in 
both the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices con­
tinue firing during the delay. This delay-period activ­
ity is thought to maintain information in short-term 
working memory (Figure 24–11). Delay-period activity 
in the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices differs 
in a number of ways. For one, activity in the inferior 
temporal cortex is associated with the short-term stor­
age of visual patterns and color information, whereas 

===== PDF PAGE 620 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     575
Figure 24–9  Familiarity with particular complex objects 
leads inferior temporal neurons to respond selectively for 
those objects. (Reproduced, with permission, from Logothetis 
and Pauls 1995. Copyright © 1995 Oxford University Press.)
A. Monkeys were trained to recognize a randomly bent wire 
from a set of two-dimensional views of the wire. The wire form 
was rotated 12° in successive views. Once recognition perfor­
mance was stable at a high level, recordings were made from 
neurons in the inferior temporal cortex while each view was 
presented. Peristimulus time histograms show the responses 
of a typical neuron to each view. This neuron responded selec­
tively to views that represented a small range of rotation of the 
object.
B. When the same neuron was tested with two sets of stimuli 
that were unfamiliar to the monkey, it failed to respond to any 
of these stimuli.
A  Familiar object
B  Unfamiliar object
–168°
–120°
–108°
–96°
–84°
–72°
–60°
–48°
–36°
–24°
–12°
0°
800 ms
60 spikes/s
Inferior
temporal cortex
activity in the prefrontal cortex encodes visuospatial 
information as well as information received from other 
sensory modalities. Delay-period activity in the infe­
rior temporal cortex also appears to be closely attuned 
to visual perception, for it encodes the sample image, 
but can be eliminated by the appearance of another 
image.
In the prefrontal cortex, by contrast, delay-period 
activity depends more on task requirements and is not 
terminated by intermittent sensory inputs, suggest­
ing that it may play a role in the recall of long-term 
memories. Experiments by Earl Miller and colleagues 
support this view. In these experiments, monkeys were 
trained to associate multiple pairs of objects. They 
were then tested on whether they had learned these 
pairwise associations, using the following procedure. 
First, a single (sample) object was presented; then, 
after a brief delay, a second (test) object appeared. The 
monkey was instructed to indicate whether the test 
object was the object paired with the sample during 
previous training.
There are two possible ways to solve this task. Dur­
ing the delay, the animal could use a sensory code and 
keep a representation of the sample object online until 
the appearance of the test object, or it could remem­
ber the sample object’s associate and keep information 
about the associate object online in a “prospective 
code” of what might appear as the test object. Remark­
ably, neuronal activity appears to transition from one 
to the other during the delay. Neurons in the prefron­
tal cortex initially encode the sensory properties of the 
sample object—the one just seen—but later begin to 
encode the expected (associated) object. As we shall 
see, such prospective coding in the prefrontal cortex 
may be the source of top-down signals to the inferior 
temporal cortex, activating neurons that represent the 
expected object and thus giving rise to conscious recall 
of that object.
The relation between long-term declarative mem­
ory storage and visual processing has been explored 
extensively in the context of remembered associations 
between visual stimuli. Over a century ago, William 
James, a founder of the American school of experimen­
tal psychology, suggested that learning visual asso­
ciations might be mediated by enhanced connectivity 
between the neurons encoding individual stimuli. To 
test this hypothesis, Thomas Albright and colleagues 
trained monkeys to associate pairs of objects that had 
no prior physical or semantic relatedness. The monkeys 
were later tested while extracellular recordings of neu­
rons in the inferior temporal cortex were made. Objects 
that had been paired often elicited similar neuronal 

===== PDF PAGE 621 =====
576    Part IV / Perception
The relationship between vision and memory can be 
studied by combining a neuropsychological approach 
with single-cell electrophysiological methods.
One behavioral paradigm used to study memory is 
the delayed-response task. A subject is required to make a 
specific response based on information remembered dur­
ing a brief delay. In one form of this task, known as delayed 
match-to-sample, the subject must indicate whether a visual 
stimulus is the same or different from a previously viewed 
cue stimulus (sample) (Figure 24–10A).
When used in conjunction with single-cell record­
ing, this task allows the experimenter to isolate three 
key components of a neuronal response: (1) the sensory 
component, the response elicited by the cue stimulus; 
(2) the short-term or working-memory component, the 
response that occurs during the delay between the cue 
and the match; and (3) the recognition-memory or famil­
iarity component, the difference between the response 
elicited by the match stimulus and the earlier response 
to the cue stimulus.
A second behavioral paradigm, the visual paired-
association task, has been used in conjunction with 
electrophysiology to explore the cellular mechanisms 
underlying the long-term storage and recall of asso­
ciations. This task differs from the delayed match-to-
sample task in that the match and cue are two different 
stimuli (Figure 24–10B).
The sample stimulus might consist of the letter A 
and the match stimulus the letter B. Through repeated 
temporal pairing and conditional reinforcement, sub­
jects learn that A and B are predictive of one another: 
They are associated.
Box 24–1  Investigating Interactions Between Vision and Working Memory
Figure 24–10A  Delayed match-to-sample task. In this 
paradigm, a trial begins with the appearance of a 
fixation spot that directs the subject’s attention and 
gaze to the center of the computer screen. A cue stimu­
lus (the “sample”) then appears briefly, typically for 
500 ms, followed by a delay in which the display is 
blank. The delay can be varied to fit the experimental 
goals. Following the delay, the choice display appears, 
which contains several images, one of which is the cue 
(the “match”). The subject must respond by choosing 
the cue stimulus, typically either by pressing a but­
ton or by a saccade to the stimulus. In the task illus­
trated here, all of the test images appear at once (a 
simultaneous match-to-sample task). They can also be 
presented sequentially (a sequential match-to-sample 
task). Although the trial’s duration may be longer for the 
sequential task, this paradigm can be advantageous for 
electrophysiological studies by limiting the visual stimuli 
present at any time.
Figure 24–10B  The paired-association task.  This para­
digm resembles the match-to-sample paradigm except 
that the cue and match are different stimuli. In the illus­
trated example, the basketball is the cue stimulus and the 
airplane is the experimenter-designated match stimulus. 
Because these stimuli have no inherent association, the 
subject must discover the designated association through 
trial-and-error learning. The task is thus to establish an 
association between nonidentical stimuli. The paired-
association task can also incorporate a delay between 
presentation of the sample and test stimuli, and it can be 
used in both simultaneous (shown) and sequential forms.
Time
Fixation
A
Cue
Choice
Reinforcement
Delay
Response
+
+
+
+
Time
Fixation
Cue
Choice
Reinforcement
Response
+
+
B

===== PDF PAGE 622 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     577
Figure 24–11  Neural activity representing an object is 
sustained while the object is held in working memory. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster and Jervey 1982. 
Copyright © 1982 Society for Neuroscience.)
A. Monkeys were trained to perform a color match-to-sample 
task. For example, a red stimulus was first presented and the 
animal later had to choose a red stimulus from among many 
colored stimuli. The task incorporated a brief delay (1–2 seconds) 
between display of the sample and the match, during which 
information about the correct target color had to be maintained 
in working memory. The purple area in the monkey’s brain indi­
cates the inferior temporal cortex.
B. Peristimulus time histograms and raster plots of action 
potentials illustrate responses of a single neuron in the inferior 
temporal cortex during the delayed match-to-sample task. The 
upper record is from trials in which the sample was red, and the 
lower record is from trials in which it was green (shown here as 
blue). The recordings show that the cell responds preferentially 
to red stimuli. In trials with a green sample, the activity of the 
neuron does not change, whereas in trials with a red sample, 
the cell exhibited a brief burst of activity following presentation 
of the sample and continued firing throughout the delay. Many 
visual neurons in the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices 
exhibit this kind of behavior.
 
Number of spikes
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
Time (s)
15
20
25
30
Cell is selective for red
Delay
Sample
Match
A
B
responses, as one would expect if functional connec­
tions had been enhanced, whereas responses elicited 
by unpaired objects were unrelated. Recordings from 
individual inferior temporal neurons while monkeys 
were learning new visual associations showed that a 
cell’s responses to paired objects became more simi­
lar over the course of training (Figure 24–12). Most 
importantly, the changes in neuronal activity occurred 
on the same timescale as the changes in behavior, and 
the changes in neural activity depended on successful 
learning.
These learning-dependent changes in the stimu­
lus selectivity of inferior temporal cortex neurons 
are long-lasting, suggesting that this cortical region 
is part of the neural circuitry for associative visual 
memories. The experimental results also support the 
view that learned associations are implemented rap­
idly by changes in the strength of synaptic connections 
between neurons representing the associated stimuli.
We know that the hippocampus and neocorti­
cal areas of the medial temporal lobe—the perirhi­
nal, entorhinal, and parahippocampal cortices—are 

===== PDF PAGE 623 =====
578    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–12  Object recognition is linked to associative 
memory. Monkeys learned associations between pairs of 
visual stimuli while activity was recorded from a neuron in the 
inferior temporal cortex. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Messinger et al. 2001. © 2001 National Academy of Sciences.)
A. Behavioral performance on a paired-association task is plot­
ted for each quartile of a single training session (572 trials). 
The animal was presented with four novel stimuli (A, B, C, D) 
and was required to learn two paired associations (A–B, C–D). 
As expected, performance began at chance (50% correct) and 
gradually climbed as the animal learned the associations.
B. Mean firing rates of an inferior temporal neuron recorded 
during the behavioral task described in part A. Each trace 
represents the firing rate during presentation of one of the four 
stimuli (A, B, C, or D). The responses to all stimuli were of 
similar magnitude at the outset. As the paired associations 
were learned, the neuronal responses to the paired stimuli 
A and B began to cluster at a different level from responses 
to the paired stimuli C and D. The neuron’s activity thus corre­
sponded to the learned associations between the two pairs.
20
15
10
5
0
Neuronal activity (spikes/s)
0
572
D
C
A
B
Trial number
Percent correct
60
50
Chance
40
30
1st
2nd
3rd
Quartile
4th
A  Animals learn to associate pairs of stimuli
B  After training neurons respond similarly to paired stimuli
essential both for the acquisition of associative visual 
memories and for the functional plasticity of the infe­
rior temporal cortex. In fact, work by Yasushi Miyashita 
and colleagues showed that the aforementioned pair-
association neurons are much more prevalent in per­
irhinal cortex than in anterior inferior temporal cortex. 
Thus, although learning changes the stimulus selectiv­
ity of neurons in both areas, the association between 
visually associated pairs grows stronger from inferior 
temporal to perirhinal cortex (Figure 24–2C). The hip­
pocampus and medial temporal lobe may facilitate the 
reorganization of local neuronal circuitry in the inferior 
temporal cortex necessary to store associative visual 
memories. The reorganization itself may be a form of 
Hebbian plasticity (Chapter 49) initiated by the tempo­
ral coincidence of the associated visual stimuli.
Associative Recall of Visual Memories 
Depends on Top-Down Activation of the 
Cortical Neurons That Process Visual Stimuli
One of the most intriguing features of high-level visual 
processing is the fact that the detection of an image in 
one’s visual field and the recall of the same image are 
subjectively similar. The former depends on the bottom-
up flow of visual information and is what we tradi­
tionally regard as vision. The latter, by contrast, is a 
product of top-down information flow. This distinc­
tion is anatomically accurate but obscures the fact that 
under normal conditions afferent and descending sig­
nals collaborate to yield visual experience.
The study of associative visual memory has pro­
vided valuable insights into the cellular mechanisms 
underlying visual recall. As we have seen, visual asso­
ciative memories are stored in the visual cortex through 
changes in the functional connectivity between neu­
rons that independently represent the associated 
stimuli. The practical consequence of this change is 
that a neuron that responded only to stimulus A prior 
to learning will respond to both A and B after these 
stimuli have been associated (Figure 24–13). Activa­
tion of an A-responsive neuron by stimulus B can be 
viewed as the neuronal correlate of top-down recall of 
stimulus A.
Neurons in the inferior temporal cortex exhibit pre­
cisely this behavior. The activity correlated with cued 
recall is nearly identical to the bottom-up activation by 
the stimulus. These neurophysiological findings are 
supported by a number of brain imaging studies that 
have identified selective activity in the visual cortex 
during cued and spontaneous recall of objects.
Although learned associations between images 
are likely to be stored through circuit changes in the 
inferior temporal cortex, activation of these circuits for 
conscious recall depends on input from the prefrontal 
cortex. The afferent signal for one of a pair of images 
might be received by the inferior temporal cortex and 
relayed to prefrontal cortex, where the information 

===== PDF PAGE 624 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     579
Figure 24–13  Circuits for visual association and recall.  
Bottom-up signals—afferent signals conveying information 
about objects in the observer’s visual field—are combined 
into object representations in the inferior temporal cortex. 
Before associative learning, a neuron (blue) responds well 
to the circus tent but not to the horse. Learned associations 
between objects are mediated in the inferior temporal cortex 
by strengthening connections between neurons representing 
each of the paired objects (the indirect pathway in the figure). 
Thus, recall of the circus tent following presentation of the 
horse is achieved by activating the indirect pathway. Indirect 
activation can also be triggered by the contents of working 
memory (feedback from the prefrontal cortex). Under 
normal conditions, visual perception is the product of a 
combination of direct and indirect inputs to inferior 
temporal neurons.
Prefrontal 
cortex
(working 
memory)
Inferior 
temporal cortex
(memory store)
Medial 
temporal lobe
(consolidation)
Low- and 
intermediate-level 
visual processing
Indirect 
pathway 
Before associative learning
After associative learning
would be maintained in working memory. As we have 
seen, the continued firing of many prefrontal neurons 
during the delay period of a delayed match-to-sample 
task initially represents information about the sam­
ple image but changes to the associated image that is 
expected to follow. Signals from prefrontal cortex to the 
inferior temporal cortex would selectively activate neu­
rons representing the associated image, and that activa­
tion would constitute the neural correlate of visual recall.
Highlights
  1.  A key function of high-level vision is object 
recognition. Object recognition imbues visual 
perception with meaning. As the eminent neu­
ropsychologist Hans-Lukas Teuber once wrote, 
failure of object recognition “would appear in its 
purest form as a normal percept that has some­
how been stripped of its meaning.”
  2.  Object recognition is difficult, primarily because 
of changes in appearance with changes in 
position, distance, orientation, or lighting condi­
tions, possibly rendering different objects similar 
in appearance. Building computer models mim­
icking primate object recognition capabilities is a 
major challenge for current and future research.
  3.  Object recognition relies on a region of the tem­
poral lobe called inferior temporal cortex. Visual 
information reaching inferior temporal cortex 
has already been processed through mechanisms 
of low- and mid-level vision.
  4.  Lesions to inferior temporal cortex cause visual 
agnosia, a loss in the ability to recognize objects. 
Apperceptive agnosia, the inability to match 
or copy complex objects, is distinguished from 
associative agnosia, the impairment of the abil­
ity to recognize an object’s meaning or function. 
Predicting the exact nature of an agnosia from 
the pattern of lesioned or inactivated areas, and 
thus to go from understanding the correlates to 
the causes of neural object representations, is a 
major goal for the field of object recognition and 
neurology.

===== PDF PAGE 625 =====
580    Part IV / Perception
  5.  Individual cells in inferior temporal cortex 
can be highly shape-selective and respond 
selectively, eg, to a hand or a face. They can 
maintain selectivity across position, size, and 
even rotation—properties that might explain 
perceptual constancy.
  6.  Inferotemporal cortex comprises a yet-unknown 
number of areas with very different functional 
specializations. While the functional logic of the 
overall organization remains unknown, we do 
know that cells with similar selectivity group into 
cortical columns and that face cells are organized 
into larger units called face areas.
  7.  Face recognition is supported by multiple face 
areas, each with a unique functional specializa­
tion. Face areas are selectively coupled to form a 
face-processing network, which has emerged as a 
model system for high-level vision.
  8.  Inferotemporal cortex is interconnected with 
perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices for 
memory formation, with the amygdala for the 
assignment of emotional valence to objects, and 
with prefrontal cortex for object categorization 
and visual working memory. If associative memo­
ries are stored as patterns of connections between 
neurons, what then are the specific contributions 
of hippocampus and neocortical structures of 
the medial temporal lobe, and by what cellular 
mechanisms do they exert their influences? The 
confluence of molecular-genetic, cellular, neuro­
physiological, and behavioral approaches prom­
ises to solve these and other problems.
  9.  Objects are perceived as members of a category. 
This simplifies the selection of appropriate 
behaviors, which often do not depend on stim­
ulus details. Neurons with categorical selectiv­
ity are found in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a 
main projection site of inferior temporal cortex.
10.  Object recognition relies on past experience. Per­
ceptual learning can improve the ability to dis­
criminate between complex objects and refine 
neural selectivity in inferior temporal cortex.
11.  Visual information can be held in short-term 
working memory to be available beyond the dura­
tion of a sensory stimulus. Neurons in temporal 
and prefrontal cortex can exhibit delay-period 
activity after the disappearance of a stimulus. 
How these networks establish the ability to keep 
information online is an open question.
12.  High-level 
visual 
information 
processing 
changes with top-down modulation. The sensory 
experience of an image in view and the recall of 
the same stimulus from memory are subjectively 
similar. Neurons in inferior temporal cortex 
exhibit similar activity during bottom-up activa­
tion and cued recall.
 Thomas D. Albright 
 Winrich A. Freiwald 
Selected Reading
Freedman DJ, Miller EK. 2008. Neural mechanisms of visual 
categorization: insights from neurophysiology. Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 32:311–329.
Gross CG. 1999. Brain, Vision, Memory: Tales in the History of 
Neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. 1997. The fusiform 
face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex special­
ized for face perception. J Neurosci 17:4302–4311.
Logothetis NK, Sheinberg DL. 1996. Visual object recogni­
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 19:577–621.
McCarthy G, Puce A, Gore J, Allison T. 1997. Face-specific 
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. J Cog Neurosci 
9:605–610.
Messinger A, Squire LR, Zola SM, Albright TD. 2005. Neural 
correlates of knowledge: stable representation of stimulus 
associations across variations in behavioral performance. 
Neuron 48:359–371.
Miller EK, Li L, Desimone R. 1991. A neural mechanism for 
working and recognition memory in inferior temporal 
cortex. Science 254:1377–1379.
Miyashita Y. 1993. Inferior temporal cortex: where visual per­
ception meets memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 16:245–263.
Schlack A, Albright TD. 2007. Remembering visual motion: 
neural correlates of associative plasticity and motion 
recall in cortical area MT. Neuron 53:881–890.
Squire LR, Zola-Morgan S. 1991. The medial temporal lobe 
memory system. Science 253:1380–1386.
Ungerleider LG, Courtney SM, Haxby JV. 1998. A neural sys­
tem for human visual working memory. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 95:883–890.
References
Baker CI, Behrmann M, Olson CR. 2002. Impact of learn­
ing on representation of parts and wholes in monkey 
inferotemporal cortex. Nat Neurosci 5:1210–1216.
Brown S, Schafer ES. 1888. An investigation into the func­
tions of the occipital and temporal lobes of the monkey’s 
brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 179:303–327.
Damasio AR, Damasio H, Van Hoesen GW. 1982. Prosop­
agnosia: anatomic basis and behavioral mechanisms. 
Neurology 32:331–341.
